whats new in ef9 - migrations (#4828)
dotnet/EntityFramework.Docs: entity-framework/core/what-is-new/ef-core-9.0/whatsnew.md

}
```

<a name="concurrent-migrations"></a>

### Protection against concurrent migrations

> EF9 introduces a locking mechanism when executing migrations to protect against multiple migrations happening simultaneously, which could leave the database in a corrupted state. This should be a rare occurrence when migrations are deployed to the production environment using [recommended methods](/ef/core/managing-schemas/migrations/applying#sql-scripts), however it could happen more often if migrations are applied at runtime using the `IMigrator.Migrate()` method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
EF9 introduces a locking mechanism to protect against multiple migrations executions happening simultaneously, as that could leave the database in a corrupted state. This should be a rare occurrence when migrations are deployed to the production environment using [recommended methods](/ef/core/managing-schemas/migrations/applying#sql-scripts), however it is more likely to happen if migrations are applied at runtime using the [`DbContext.Database.Migrate()`](/dotnet/api/microsoft.entityframeworkcore.relationaldatabasefacadeextensions.migrate) method.
```

Reviewer 2: Re "This should be a rare occurrence when migrations are deployed to the production environment using recommended methods" - shouldn't it never happen at all if you're using the recommended methods? Like if you're using migration bundles or SQL scripts, you're in control and are presumably never running in them in parallel?

> EF9 introduces a locking mechanism to protect against multiple migration executions happening simultaneously, as that could leave the database in a corrupted state. This shouldn't happen when migrations are deployed to the production environment using [recommended methods](/ef/core/managing-schemas/migrations/applying#sql-scripts), however it is more likely to occur if migrations are applied at runtime using the [`DbContext.Database.Migrate()`](/dotnet/api/microsoft.entityframeworkcore.relationaldatabasefacadeextensions.migrate) method. We recommend not to apply migrations at runtime outside of the development cycle, but in some scenarios it is unavoidable, e.g. [working with using .NET Aspire projects](/dotnet/aspire/database/ef-core-migrations).

Reviewer 2: Applying migrations at runtime isn't unavoidable with Aspire - it's possible to have a separate project managing migrations, and to make that container start up first, applying the migrations in a single place before the app instances are started. However, this is heavier and more complicated to set up.

We really should work with one of the Aspire people to have EF+Aspire docs either here in our docs, or in the Aspire docs, or both (or at least cross-link). /cc @SamMonoRT 

```suggestion
EF9 introduces a locking mechanism to protect against multiple migration executions happening simultaneously, as that could leave the database in a corrupted state. This doesn't happen when migrations are deployed to the production environment using [recommended methods](/ef/core/managing-schemas/migrations/applying#sql-scripts), but can happen if migrations are applied at runtime using the [`DbContext.Database.Migrate()`](/dotnet/api/microsoft.entityframeworkcore.relationaldatabasefacadeextensions.migrate) method. We recommend applying migrations at deployment, rather than as part of application startup, but that can result in more complicated application architectures (e.g. [when using .NET Aspire projects](/dotnet/aspire/database/ef-core-migrations).
```

> [!NOTE]
> We recommend not to apply migrations at runtime outside of the development cycle, but in some scenarios it is unavoidable, e.g. [working with using .NET Aspire projects](/dotnet/aspire/database/ef-core-migrations).

<a name="warn-when-no-transaction"></a>

### Warn when multiple migration operations can't be run inside a transaction

> Majority of operations performed during migrations are protected by a transaction. This ensures that if for some reason migration fails, the database does not end up in a corrupted state. However, some operations are not wrapped in a transaction (e.g. [operations on memory-optimized tables](/sql/relational-databases/in-memory-oltp/unsupported-sql-server-features-for-in-memory-oltp#scenarios-not-supported), or database altering operations like modifying the database collation). To avoid corrupting the database in case of migration failure, it is recommended that these operations are performed in isolation using a separate migration. EF9 now detects a scenario when a migration contains multiple operations, one of which can't be wrapped in a transaction, and issues a warning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The majority of operations performed during migrations are protected by a transaction. This ensures that if for some reason migration fails, the database does not end up in a corrupted state. However, some operations are not wrapped in a transaction (e.g. [operations on memory-optimized tables](/sql/relational-databases/in-memory-oltp/unsupported-sql-server-features-for-in-memory-oltp#scenarios-not-supported), or database-altering operations like modifying the database collation). To avoid corrupting the database in case of a migration failure, it is recommended that these operations are performed in isolation using a separate migration. EF9 now detects a scenario when a migration contains multiple operations, one of which can't be wrapped in a transaction, and issues a warning.
```

> Tring to migrate from the following model:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Trying to migrate from the following model:
```

> The majority of operations performed during migrations are protected by a transaction. This ensures that if for some reason migration fails, the database does not end up in a corrupted state. However, some operations are not wrapped in a transaction (e.g. [operations on memory-optimized tables](/sql/relational-databases/in-memory-oltp/unsupported-sql-server-features-for-in-memory-oltp#scenarios-not-supported), or database altering operations like modifying the database collation). To avoid corrupting the database in case of migration failure, it is recommended that these operations are performed in isolation using a separate migration. EF9 now detects a scenario when a migration contains multiple operations, one of which can't be wrapped in a transaction, and issues a warning.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The majority of operations performed during migrations are protected by a transaction. This ensures that if for some reason migration fails, the database does not end up in a corrupted state. However, some operations are not wrapped in a transaction (e.g. [operations on SQL Server memory-optimized tables](/sql/relational-databases/in-memory-oltp/unsupported-sql-server-features-for-in-memory-oltp#scenarios-not-supported), or database altering operations like modifying the database collation). To avoid corrupting the database in case of migration failure, it is recommended that these operations are performed in isolation using a separate migration. EF9 now detects a scenario when a migration contains multiple operations, one of which can't be wrapped in a transaction, and issues a warning.
```

> Trying to migrate from the following model:

Reviewer 2: Am not sure a code sample is really needed here... Code samples are great to show people how to do something; but this is a new warning - users don't need to be taught how to trigger it, they'll just encounter it when they create the problematic migration etc. (so the paragraph above seems sufficient to me).
